{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-BoldItalic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Theory\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 How does being directly or proximally impacted by the criminal legal system shape perceptions of what policy carceral citizens deserve? My theoretical starting point is that perceptions of what groups like carceral citizens deserve are often shaped by social constructions about them (Schneider and Ingram 1993). Like stereotypes, these constructions are produced by policy and discourse \'96 both political, cultural, and popular. On the individual level, then, these constructions are often taken up in a heuristic process to form quick judgements about what a target group deserves. Thus, predominant racialized constructions of incarcerated people \'96 \'93thugs,\'94 \'93felons,\'94 or \'93inmates\'94 \'96 suggesting culpable, ungrateful, \'93takers\'94 responsible for their condition of confinement are likely interpolated as undeserving, translating (following Schneider and Ingram) to support for punitive carceral policy.\'a0\
I suggest that contact with the carceral system affects this process (by.../on xyz levels). Applying insights from the policy feedback literature to matters of target deservingness, I suggest that experience with the criminal legal system \'96 including victimization \'96 leads people to more strongly support policies that help incarcerated people, and to more nuanced ways of thinking about the relationship between what a carceral target 'deserves' and what policy is appropriate.\
Contact may inform information about targets, (2) attitudes towards targets, (3) attitudes towards criminal legal institutions, and (3). These factors, I propose, may drive distinct perceptual outcomes and policy preferences between, and more support for policy help across, the three impact groups than "non-impacted" constituencies.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa319\partightenfactor0

\f2\i\b \cf0 Intervening in Target Deservingness
\f0\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 By definition, direct impact \'96 incarceration \'96 and proximate impact will change what information about criminal legal targets is available and salient. Someone who is in and knows people in prison has a different array of information than someone who has only seen "prisoners" on TV. In turn, this informational effect could translate to more generous interpretations of CARIN criteria (Oorschot 2000, 2006, Feather 2009). While policy feedback literature shows that many carceral citizens and their networks internalize the clear "undeserving" messages that prison policy sends, it also shows that, across contexts where interactions with the criminal legal system mobilize or demobilize, these experiences shape attitudes towards the state (Anoll et al 2022, Anoll and Israel-Trummel 2019, Walker 2020, Lerman and Weaver 2014). As such, I propose that interactions with the criminal legal system should also shape attitudes towards 
\f3\i targets
\f1\i0  of the state. While some work finds that targets of policy can internalize negative or undeserving constructions (Soss 1999), much of the work on criminal legal contact stresses that demobilization is a product of resource effects or interpretive effects 
\f3\i distinct
\f1\i0  from an \'93undeserving\'94 self-conception (Lerman and Weaver 2014, White 2019). Instead, other work emphasizes that direct contact with the criminal legal system can heighten in-group solidarity (Lerman and Weaver 2014) and mobilize in spite resource and interpretive feedbacks that should be demobilizing, specifically when policy targets reject policy \'93teachings\'94 about their lower civic status as part of a sense of systemic injustice \'96 suggesting a perception that the criminal legal system is less legitimate or authoritative, and of its targets as distinctly deserving (Walker 2020).\
Proximal contact also generates political mobilization despite policy experiences that "should" demobilize (Anoll et al 2022, White 2019b). Anoll\'92s (2022) findings that family of the incarcerated vote at higher rates in states with more stringent carceral disenfranchisement policies suggests that \'93surrogate\'94 mobilization is motivated by a desire to act on behalf a \'93deserving\'94 incarcerated citizen. Her findings with Israel-Trummel (2019) that neighborhood exposure to racially discriminatory policing generate perceptions of institutional 
\f3\i il
\f1\i0 legitimacy \'96 distrust in police and government \'96 suggest exposure should also alter and perhaps enhance perceptions in institutional targets as well.\
Like others (), I note that those proximally impacted may be somewhat more removed from undeserving messages than the incarcerated, whichh should leading to warmer perceptions of carceral deservingness for the proximally than directly impacted. A limitation of this hypothesis is the improbability of people who have been incarcerated not knowing another incarcerated person well. Thus, I hypothesize that 
\f0\b (H1)
\f1\b0  those with direct or proximal experiences with the carceral state will view incarcerated people as more deserving, and 
\f0\b (H1A)
\f1\b0  those who know incarcerated people should report the most generosity.\
While it seems obvious that, particularly for victims, this might go the other way, evidence that more abstracted, dehumanized stereotypes about carceral citizens (Vasiljevic and Viki 2014) generate harsher assessments of culpability (Levinson 2007, Levinson et al 2010, Donovan 2007, Israel-Trummel and Streeter 2021) and sentences (Rehavi and Starr 2014) suggests that information 
\f3\i besides
\f1\i0  conviction and crime about carceral citizens should have a countervailing humanizing effect (Uggen and Manza 2006).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa319\partightenfactor0

\f2\i\b \cf0 Victimization Effects on Deservingness Perceptions
\f0\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 While victimization might intuitively drive negative perceptions of carceral citizens, I suggest the relationship is more complex. To be sure, there are clear reasons why victimization may generate undeserving perceptions of and opposition to policies that help carceral targets. Victimization is obviously a salient experience that for many drives negative affect toward those who commit crimes (Ditton et al. 1999). Victims usually engage the criminal legal system because they believe their offender is deserving of punishment, and they are deserving of establishing a sense of safety and justice. But it is also true that to accomplish the latter, victims of violent crime have few other options \'96 including if they know their perpetrator personally or understand their perpetrator to be in need of help. And such overlap in contact is significant (Gebo 2019). Victims of violent crime are disproportionately part of communities most heavily policed and incarcerated, and most victims of violent crime know their offender (Bureau of Justice 2024). An extensive literature shows that people who are incarcerated have disproportionately been victims of crime \'96 one review article cited 31 of 37 papers support this overlap (Jennings et al 2012). While 2% of the general US population report being victims of violent crime, up to 45% of carceral citizens have experienced pre-incarceration physical abuse, and 8.5 to 39.2% of specifically sexual abuse (Azimi et al 2019, Carlson and Shafer 2010, Messina et al 2007, Wolff and Shi 2012, Yoder et al. 2017). Still more experience violence while incarcerated (Wolff et al 2009). Thus, while for many victims the proximity and salience of a criminal may bolster negative social constructions and deservingness perceptions, it might also translate to more nuanced perceptions of culpability and a closer alignment of identity that moderates negative affect.\
Additionally, victims face restrictive social constructions distinct in content but similar in "stickiness" to those of carceral citizens. For example, Lens et al (2014) show that in navigating narrow expectations of "appropriate" emotional responses in the criminal justice process \'96 non-emotional victims risk disbelief while overly emotional victims face judgment \'96 victims experience "secondary victimizations" that foment institutional sketipicism.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa319\partightenfactor0

\f2\i\b \cf0 Contact on Policy Preferences
\f0\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Social construction theory suggests that perceptions of target deservingness translate directly to policy preferences: groups constructed as undeserving receive punitive policy while deserving groups receive beneficial policy (Schneider and Ingram 1993). In this framework, warmer perceptions of incarcerated people's deservingness should predict greater support for policies that help rather than punish them. I therefore hypothesize that 
\f0\b (H2)
\f1\b0  more generous perceptions of carceral citizens' deservingness will predict greater support for assistance-oriented policies and reduced support for punitive policies.\
However, evidence from SoRelle and Laws (2023) and others suggests the relationship between deservingness perceptions and policy support may not be straightforward in all contexts. The criminal legal domain may have unique dynamics where perceptions of groups and support for policies directed at them operate through different mechanisms.\
While direct and proximal contact likely increase perceptions of deservingness (H1), there are reasons to expect additional direct effects on policy preferences.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Direct and Proximal Contact Effects on Policy Preferences\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Policy feedback literature indicates that contact with the criminal legal system shapes not only perceptions of targets but also attitudes toward institutions and policies. Lerman and Weaver (2014) demonstrate that court, police, and prison encounters foster government distrust and altered civic identity. Walker (2020) shows how carceral citizens develop a sense of "systemic injustice" that shapes their policy views beyond simple in-group solidarity.\
Similarly, proximal contact generates institutional feedback effects that may directly influence policy preferences. Anoll and Israel-Trummel (2019) find that neighborhood exposure to discriminatory policing generates perceptions of institutional illegitimacy that shape policy attitudes independent of perceptions about policed individuals.\
These findings suggest that carceral contact may affect policy preferences through mechanisms beyond deservingness perceptions alone. I therefore hypothesize that 
\f0\b (H4)
\f1\b0  direct and proximate experiences with incarceration will lead to greater support for decarceral or assistance-oriented policies, even after controlling for deservingness perceptions.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Victimization and Policy Preferences\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Similar complexity characterizes the relationship between victimization and policy preferences. While victims are often portrayed in public discourse as supporting punitive policies (Levine and Russell), research indicates victimization does not increase punitiveness (Kleck and Jackson 2016). Instead, victims appear more concerned with improved compensation (Shapland 1984) and addressing root causes of crime (ASJ 2024)\
The experiences of "expectancy violation" and secondary victimization documented by Lens et al. (2014) suggest victims may develop institutional skepticism that directly shapes their policy views beyond their perceptions of perpetrators. Victims who experience the criminal justice system as imposing restrictive narratives may develop policy preferences focused on systemic reform rather than individual punishment.\
Evidence that victimization increases political participation (Bateson 2012), including in resource-intensive community organizing, further suggests victims develop nuanced policy perspectives that may not align with simple punitive impulses. Therefore, I extend H4 to include victims, suggesting victimization experience will also predict greater support for assistance-oriented policies beyond what is explained by deservingness perceptions.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Summary of Theoretical Framework\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 This theoretical framework recognizes multiple pathways through which carceral contact may shape both deservingness perceptions and policy preferences. While the deservingness literature suggests a straightforward relationship (deservingness \uc0\u8594  policy preferences), policy feedback literature indicates contact creates institutional effects that may independently influence policy views. By examining both pathways simultaneously, this study contributes to our understanding of how direct experience with policy shapes political attitudes and preferences.\
.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 In the criminal legal domain, I expect that the salience of negative social constructions of policy targets could make perceptions of deservingness \'93stickier\'94 than views on what policy help or punishment targets deserve. Thus, while I expect that individuals who are directly or proximately impacted by the criminal legal system will hold different beliefs about criminal policy than those who are not, the role of deservingness perceptions in this context remains to be seen.
\f1\i0 \
While considering the array of unique policy designs with which victims engaging with the criminal legal system come in contact is beyond the scope of this paper, there is reason to think\
victims themselves may experience a wide arrange of policy feedbacks, complicating views on policy compared to those without direct experience.\
that often generates anger (Ditton et al 1999) and drive negative affect and perceptions of what criminals deserve. Evidence that crime victimization increases political participation (Bateson 2012), including in resource-intensive activities like sustained community organizing that offers a path for coping with trauma (Rozowsky 2002, Walklate 2007), may also reflect more nuanced views of policy changes needed to address root causes of crime.\
As such, I suggest that (
\f0\b H1C
\f1\b0 ) while victims of violent crime may vary more than other target groups \'96 holding less generous or more ambivalent views \'96 they will still view carceral citizens as more deserving than those who are not impacted.\

\f3\i While victims are usually presented as supportive of punitive policy in public theater \'96 the recent naming of the Laken Riley Act, offers a clear example \'96 the relationship is far less clear. Instead, victimization does not appear to increase punitiveness (Kleck and Jackson 2016), and victims instead appear more concerned with improved victims compensation (Shapland 1984) and policies addressing \'93root causes\'94 of crime (ASJ 2024).
\f1\i0 \
}